but the first of two interviews looking
at legislation to change the way
Congress is notified of covert actions
by the administration spend homes staff
director and general counsel of the
Senate Intelligence Committee what's the
motivation behind s 1721 otherwise known
as the covert action bill currently
before the Senate well Bruce certainly a
number of the issues in 1721 were put in
very clear focused by the iran-contra
affair although it would be too
simplistic to say that that was the
primary motivation because the
Intelligence Committee in fact has been
working on ways to strengthen the
oversight process literally going back
for the last seven or eight years so the
work had begun earlier but in point of
fact the iran-contra really gave a lot
of impetus to that process and brought
it to a closure let me ask your
colleague and opposite number brit
schneider minority counsel of the Senate
Intelligence Committee what are the key
elements of this bill well the bill
primarily focuses on covert actions and
the standards by which the president
approves covert actions what conditions
that govern his decision and reporting
that decision to the Congress that's the
focus of it and before we get done with
this discussion we'll I'll ask you your
conclusions too what do you think is
going to happen to it but let's talk
about the particulars of it there's
there's something called a 48-hour
requirement what is that 48-hour
requirement is is
basically a congressional statement that
if the president is to undertake covert
operations through the execution of what
is called a finding that within 48 hours
of signing that finding he must notify
Congress that in fact such a finding has
been signed and that a covert operation
is about to be undertaken Britt Snyder
why is it that the legislation would
require the president personally to act
or to report and not the director of the
CIA for example well the president has
to sign the fine and he doesn't have to
report that personally to the committee
that can be done in fact by the Director
of Central Intelligence but the purpose
of the of the bills provision that the
President himself take responsibility
for it was to ensure that no matter what
Department agency of the executive
branch may be given this sort of
assignment or task that it would in fact
be the president's responsibility to
ensure that its reporting to the cars
did you want to say something about the
48-hour requirement yes I'd I just
wanted to elaborate on what Finn said I
think it's important for people to
understand that the normal rule in this
area is prior notice to the two
intelligence committees and in fact
there has been no case other than the
iran-contra situation where the
committees were not notified in advance
of a finding being implemented and so
what we're talking about here for the
48-hour rule is an exceptional
circumstance we ought to talk about what
the current law is well the current law
provides that as Britt says that in all
but exceptional circumstances there
should be prior notification that the
1980 law that's the 1980 law there is an
exception which provides that in cases
rarest circumstances that the president
so determines that he may notify
Congress quote in a timely manner and it
was in fact that question of what did a
timely manner constitute
that gave rise to a very clear need to
be more specific and to bring that down
to a time cert and that's why the what
the committee looked at is what is what
is an appropriate time certain that will
serve as the safety net in cases where
prior notification is not utilized but
rather it is going to be after the fact
after the signing of the finding how
much time should be given where does the
president's proper constitutional
authority to initiate an action start
coming up against Congress's proper
constitutional need to have information
to who to fulfill its responsibilities
under the Constitution to appropriate
monies for executive branch undertakings
and I think that's what this bill is a
very careful approach to trying to to
delineate those between those two
responsibilities and to work work out
the two activities simultaneously
without kind of just this amorphous
timely manner and in fact there were
some who argued and the executive branch
remember the Justice Department argued
as a matter of their view with the law
that timely fashion by its very nature
meant that the president could decide
whenever he felt it was appropriate to
notify Congress and clearly in in the
balance of powers that's there's no
balance in that that simply open-ended
authority to the executive branch which
Snyder what's your response to the
argument that the administration has
made that this is an unconstitutional
infringement on his executive powers
well I think the you know our response
is that this is an area covert actions
of shared constitutional power it's been
pointed out the Congress appropriates
money for these activities these
activities have the potential for
drawing the u.s. into combat situations
they have a potential for affecting the
military readiness of the Armed Forces
and certainly they raise other policy
problems to Congress and then in the you
know carrying out its legislative
responsibilities has a need to know and
an ability to deal with and they can't
deal with them unless they know about
them and so you know the president
obviously has some constitutional
responsibilities as commander-in-chief
to undertake actions within the to
protect us interests overseas but these
are not these are not powers and
prerogatives that you know avoid the
Congress or that necessarily mean that
Congress can't play in this excuse me
the decisions let's talk about the
definition of covert action and I would
suppose that the definition really goes
to the heart of it because it would
trigger or not trigger the requirement
how does the bill handle the definition
problem well the way the the legislation
ultimately was crafted was to seek to
maintain the current definitions of
covert actions or set out in the bill
special activities currently special
activities are governed by two
independent sources of authority one is
the Hughes Ryan statutory source of
authority and the second is executive
order 12333 now what this bill attempts
to do is rather than make some kind of
major overhaul and in those definitions
is to set them out comprehensively in a
statutory form and to put in place as a
matter of statute rather than executive
order a comprehensive definition which
in effect is the current definitions of
special activity it's not meant to
change it it - to change it would be
it's something that we are looking at
and with the executive branch but did
not feel that in in this particular
legislature
was appropriate to do that one of the
arguments to that we've heard against it
is the problem of leaks more people know
the more leaks your staff people of the
Intelligence Committee how do you
respond to that issue well I can save as
the as far as the Senate Intelligence
Committee is concerned that we have had
no leaks of information involving a
covert action program in the history of
the committee this information is is
protected very stringently is kept in a
vaulted areas during the day
neither senators nor the staff can
remove it from those spaces we have in
fact in the compartment or in the covert
action area we have compartments so that
unless you're in a particular
compartment and a member of the staff
you don't get access so that instead of
30 or 35 people having access it really
turns out to be more like seven or eight
on the committee staff I take it you
both have security clearances we
certainly do what level well we have the
highest level clearances in the you know
in the government we have access to all
of the intelligence programs that the
government as far as the Congress is
concerned security and leaks is not a
problem in this bill no it's not a
problem in this bill I think I think it
is that is not to say that the Congress
isn't always concerned about security I
think that that's that's something that
the intelligence committees view as a
fundamental responsibility to do our
share to participate in the oversight
process and we have very tight security
procedures and and feels that pursuant
to those procedures that it really
doesn't create the opportunity for leaks
well mr. Holmes this is an area that is
not generally or was widely known about
how the Intelligence Committee of the
Congress interacts with the executive on
these sensitive matters and as you know
in these programs and Sunday night's our
focuses process and policy and this is a
process that really could bear some
explanation
how does a piece of sensitive
information get transferred and who
looks at it who doesn't you do even some
senators get denied access I don't know
why don't you just talk to it well I
think I think this is a very important
area and I think it really helps to to
demonstrate not only why this is a good
bill but the philosophy underlying the
bill and that is that the intelligence
committees in this special area of
covert operations operates in to some
large degree is the surrogate for the
American public policy in the United
States is generally formulated in public
the elected representatives the American
people have an opportunity to react to
to say this is bad we should shift it
this way or that way
and that's one of the things that makes
a democracy great it makes it strong
well in a covert operation by this very
nature it cannot go through that process
it cannot be tested against public
opinion cannot be tested against open
criticism by the press and by the
elected representatives to the contrary
it is brought merely to the intelligence
committees 15 members Senate and House
and presented as as an undertaking that
the administration is going to do that
will be denied it's pretty that they
ever participated in it and the the
committee's effectively take this in and
serve just 15 as the entire public
testing ground because even their
reactions are private they can't go to
the public they can't or certainly go to
other members even of the United States
Senate they are the entire cauldron of
public opinion embodied in 15 people and
the way the process works is if if the
president signs a finding that the
finding is is brought and presented to
the members of the Intelligence
Committee they're briefed on on the
contents of the finding what the
objectives are and why it's why it's
been undertaken and and other kinds of
oversight concern
that the committee would raise for it
Schneider how many of the staff people
have the level of security clearance
that a senator would have well first of
all you all to understand centers aren't
cleared senators by their position have
access to any level of classified
information that that they need to carry
out their responsibilities of the
committee are all hundred senators now
just on the committee okay at this point
they don't have the background checks
just by the membership on the committee
there that's correct I see but you on
the other hand as a staffer had to go
through that had to go through extensive
background checks we also as staff have
to sign agreements with the committee
which you know where we recognize our
responsibilities to protect the
information that we're going to have
access to we recognize that if we don't
protect it will be fired we have to
sound agreements that we're about we
agree that we will submit documents we
want to publish in the area intelligence
or review before they're published and
it's quite quite a stringent regime
there that the staff has to undergo and
how many people are we talking about for
those requirements we're talking about
what's been thirty five thirty six
something like yeah and that be on the
Senate side okay that's correct
what about the house side you know the
Senate the house that has a smaller
staff I think around twenty five it's my
recollection no they have a similar
regime over there and it's I might add
you know the Senators themselves are
told when they join the committee that
if they if they are found to be
responsible for leaks that they will be
removed from the committee by the
leadership so that's a fairly powerful
you know deterrent I would think and the
legislation contemplates several levels
of of notice though at least I've seen
different proposals some would notify
all fifteen some would notify only the
speaker and the majority leader can you
took walk through that and what do you
think is going to be the final outcome
well there's effectively three levels of
notice and
the first level of notice which is the
level which is contemplated in in nearly
all cases and in fact in the history of
the notification of these programs only
in a couple of limited instances has it
not been followed and that's
notification of the intelligence
committees in their entirety now under
the rarest of circumstances described as
described in the bill the president may
determine to narrow that notification
down to the chairman and vice-chairman
of the two intelligence committees as
well as the speaker and Majority Leader
of and minority leaders of the House and
Senate it's so-called gang of eight and
the third level which is really the
president makes a determination that
there is very serious security concerns
very rare circumstances that he can
narrow it further still to the gang of
four which is the speaker and the
Minority Leader of the House and a
majority minority leader of the of the
Senate and in that situation what you're
really talking about is not so much an
activity that would be an intelligence
something that would require a
particular expertise in the area of
intelligence but rather an undertaking
such as taking the hostages and Iran
that came out through the Canadian
Embassy and has been discussed since
that time that it doesn't require any
expertise to know that there were
Iranian hostages and what you're saying
is we're in luck fortunately there's
some who managed to get out of the
embassy they're in the Canadian Embassy
and we're about to embark on a program
to bring them out and that would be the
kind of thing that potentially could be
narrowed even to the game of pool it's
interesting here that Senator Cohen who
winter who was the principal sponsor of
this bill and vice chairman of the
committee actually disagreed with the
Gang of Four so to speak
he preferred having the
the eight leaders notified which will
include the Intelligence Committee
chairman and vice-chairman primarily
because he was interested in saying that
those who had the knowledge in the area
he knew the right questions to ask about
covert actions they're being advised of
what in fact be being formed he went
along with the gang of four in order to
have compromised them within the
committee in both the bill out but he
would have preferred the gang of eight
well I oughta point out that Senator
Cohen as the chief sponsor is the vice
chairman of committees you just did but
you report to him he's your pal that's
right and spent Holmes your boss is the
committee chairman David Boren that's
right Democratic Oklahoma and he's floor
managing the bill he and Senator Cohen
both together managing the bill together
why don't we just back up just a second
and talk about the bipartisan nature of
the committee and how it operates and
and if you have a comment or two about
the was a time when all of our foreign
policy was bipartisan do you think
that's still a case and and so forth
well in terms of foreign policy I'm not
you know I think I'm really confident or
to comment but as far as intelligence is
concerned I can say it's a very
bipartisan approach is there
partisanship in this debate very little
the bill was reported from our committee
by vote of 13 to 2 which indicates in
itself the bipartisan support it had
within the committee and I think this
isn't an issue that you know just simply
should not be treated along partisan
lines it's not it's not that sort of an
issue it's it's what Congress needs to
know in order to do its job that's what
we're talking about here spent homes I
mean well I think I think that Brit is
exactly right
within our committee the view is simply
that the intelligence is much too
important an area to have partisan views
and certainly from from the top and
relationship between Senator Boren and
Senator Cohen is one of tremendous
respect and cooperation and right on
down the line the within the committee
it's a full participation by both sides
of the aisle and and to be truthful with
you we when we start talking about
putting together particular task forces
or groups to study different problems
honestly never occurs to us I I do with
with Britt and with the minority staff
director and we did we talked about
people who have some expertise in the
area and time and it never even is
raised that they were representative of
one party or another fact it's I think
noteworthy that we do not have a ranking
minority member of the committee we have
a vice chairman when the Chairman is not
there the vice chairman assumes the
chair of the committee it's not passed
to another to a Democrat like all the
other committees like all the other
committees on the hill so that just that
in itself is an indication of the
bipartisan nature of the committee
before we talk about what's gonna happen
in the Senate next week can you give us
a status report Britt Snyder about where
this thing is in the house side if
anywhere yes in the house side there has
been a bill introduced by the chairman
of the House Intelligence Committee
congressman Stokes that is very similar
to the bill that's now pending before
the Senate that bill is currently the
subject of hearings by the House
Intelligence Committee but so far they
as far as I know they've not scheduled
any committee action on that bill is
there give us a general opinion as to
whether or not both houses are tracking
along so that there might be legislation
before the year is out yes they are
tracking along together and and one of
the reasons is the
there is a good deal of cooperation and
communication between ourselves and the
House Council and house side staff
director as well and in fact we work
together with them in the early stages
of of talking about ways in which to
strengthen this process and congressman
Stokes testified in favor of 1721 as
part of our hearing so there's been a
very close cooperation we anticipate
that it'll work right on through to the
point of having legislation this year
all right where does this bill s 1721
stand right now s 1721 is is on the
floor calendar it was called up for
action on Thursday afternoon
last Thursday afternoon and opening
statements were made on Thursday and on
Friday the bills on the floor all day
there was one amendment that was brought
to a vote which was probably the most
significant amendment that had it been
successful would have really changed the
shape of the legislation and that
amendment was defeated 65 to 23 what is
that amendment that amendment was to
basically strip out the 48-hour
provision and to open up again this
opportunity for the chief executive to
take as long as as he deemed it
necessary to notify the Congress and in
so doing what essentially undermined the
ability of Congress to fulfill its
responsibilities Britt Snowden when it's
on the floor is does that mean that the
non-germane Amendment problem has been
solved is the panama question for
example no longer a concern as we look
forward to a debate in a vote no in fact
the panama amendment is as I recall it
still will be the pending item of
business what is that this was an
amendment that was offered up by Senator
Helms on Friday afternoon and the thrust
of it was that it was a sense of a
Senate resolution that that said
basically that if efforts were not made
to extradite general Noriega to the
United
face to face the drug charges have been
brought against him that the United
States would then consider such actions
as removing American the dependence from
Panama that sort of thing so there will
be debate and the vote on that
well assuming that Senator Helms wants
to pursue that yes I mean he obviously
has the option of withdrawing his
amendment at any time he chooses did I
understand correctly that Senator Byrd
has filed a cloture motion senator Byrd
has filed a cloture motion and the
purpose of that was to try to at least
get a get a handle on the possibility of
a series of non-germane amendments
certainly the the issues that were
raised on Friday both with respect to
the Panama Canal and also with respect
to SS 20s
while they're important issues and
concerns are simply not germane to this
bill and of course as you well know
Bruce when you if you can bring the
thing through on a cloture motion then
you have the opportunity to strip out
some of the non-germane issues and get
really down to the substance of the bill
I know staff people don't always want to
get too much in the fray but are you
willing to make offer an opinion as to
whether this bill could survive a veto
[Music]
well I think it could survive a veto
sure do you think it'll have to spend
homes I think that I think this I think
first of all that it can survive a veto
as evidenced by the fact that the
amendment on Friday was a 65 to 23 vote
so of the remaining 12 members all you
need is one two additional members and
you're able to survive a veto second of
all I think that as the president chief
executive takes a very close look and he
recognizes ultimately the strong
bipartisan support comes to appreciate
the responsibility with which this
legislation was approached that some of
the the
harder line positions is articulated by
the legal representative from the
Justice Department will really be put in
context and and I think there's a good
chance that he will will sign the bill
last word Britt Snyder when is it going
to pass the Senate hopefully this week
spent insane I think so
all right thank you both spent home
staff director and general counsel for
the Senate Intelligence Committee and
Britt Snyder minority counsel for the
same committee appreciate you being with
us this evening thank you next on c-span
we continue our look at legislation
governing the way Congress is notified
of covert action as we bring you an
interview with Daniel Silver who's the
former general counsel for the CIA
[Music]
Daniel silver former general counsel of
the CIA do you believe that the proposal
currently before the Senate to require
presidential notice to Congress of
covert projects is a good idea no I
don't I think it's a an ill-considered
reaction to a very strong provocation
but nonetheless misguided
what was that provocation I think the
provocation obviously was the Iran or
so-called iran-contra affair and the
failure of the administration to notify
the Congress of a covert activity which
appeared to be a subject for
notification under the existing
intelligence oversight act of 1980 now
you were general counsel from 1979 to 81
81 you were involved in the exist the
the creation of the existing rule yes I
was what is the existing role well the
the existing rule on notification
required so-called timely notification a
term which was vague it was deliberately
vague the legislation at that time was
an attempt to strike a rather tenuous
balance between the constitutional
prerogatives and aspirations of the
executive branch and the legislative
branch neither of which unfortunately is
clear we're dealing here in essentially
a gray area under the Constitution the
the drafting of that legislation in in
that respect and a number of other
respects deliberately erred on the side
of ambiguity because there was no way to
reconcile the assertions of the Congress
to an absolute right to to be informed
of everything and the assertion of the
the president that he had constitutional
obligations which
we're incumbent on him whether or not
Congress was informed of covert
activities now we've already talked with
the staff about what's in this bill what
are your what is your fundamental
objection to it by the way the bill
being asked 1721 well I have a number of
objections basically I think what this
legislation does is to throw down a
gauntlet before the executive branch
before the President on the issue of his
constitutional authorities and it does
this not only by the way with respect to
so-called prior notice of covert actions
which are called special activities in
this bill and that being the point which
has gotten I think virtually all of the
attention in the press such as there has
been but it also does it in the area of
intelligence collection in which the
bill removes some very important priam
Buehler language that was it is in the
existing legislation recognizing the
existence of certain constitutional
prerogatives let me correct that because
certainly the people on the
congressional side would take exception
with what I just said not recognizing
but reserving such powers as may exist
not purporting to infringe on the
constitutional powers of the President
to conduct intelligence activities
outside the scope of the bill that has
been substantially eroded in the new
proposed legislation with respect to
intelligence collection and with respect
to special activities the bill flatly
requires prior notice before the
initiation of those activities
the only reference to the constitutional
prerogatives of the President that one
finds in the bill is a statement that it
is not intended to detract from his
constitutional power to initiate
intelligence activities without
notifying the the Congress and I believe
that
those words were chosen very carefully
so as to exclude any presidential power
to conduct intelligence activities once
initiated in other words the the
Congress is leaving only if this bill is
passed a very small crack in the in the
door for the president to initiate an
activity as long as he immediately
thereafter gives notice to the to the
Congress what this does in my view was
as I said before is to really throw down
a gauntlet make any president who for
whatever compelling reason which may be
a good reason as well as a misguided
reason as in the Iran situation feels
that he needs to initiate and conduct an
intelligence activity whether it be
collection or special activities without
notifying the Congress he really does it
at his peril in the wake of the
iran-contra affair do you believe any
legislation is necessary I really don't
you like the current law I can't say
that I like the current law I think it
has it has its own constitutional
defects or raises constitutional issues
but I think it was the best that could
be done in a very difficult set of
circumstances where there's very little
guidance as to how to work out the
arrangements between the two branches of
government my view as to what needs to
be done in the wake of the iran-contra
affair is a job of rebuilding or perhaps
simply building a climate of confidence
between the executive branch and the
oversight organs of the the Congress so
that confrontations don't arise in the
future so that
as a matter of wise decision on the part
of the president the leaders of Congress
are kept informed of potentially
controversial or significant
intelligence activities in both the
collection and covert action areas does
it take legislation to do that I think
on the contrary the legislation by
creating a climate of confrontation will
accessor bait the tensions that are
inherent in the relations between the
executive and the Congress and will make
it harder it also is diverting the
attention of both the executive branch
and I would submit of the the Congress
from the real issues of how do you
create a climate of trust
what can the Congress do to to make
itself a more palatable recipient of
sensitive information to to be less
confrontational in its relationship with
the executive branch in the intelligence
area and on the other side how can the
executive branch become more responsible
and responsive in dealing with the
Congress those are issues that are just
being lost sight of I believe back to
the bill how about that are you if at
all that the bill requires the President
to notify the Congress instead of the
director of the CIA I think it is
undesirable to impose obligations of
that kind on the president why
because I think more symbolically than
perhaps in any other way it accessor
baits again the the confrontation
confrontational or tension creating
aspects of the of the legislation and
tends to some degree to demean the the
presidency I don't think there's a
constitutional difference the director
of Central Intelligence is acting as the
president's surrogate in effect under
the present legislation in informing the
Congress of about intelligence
activities who's for who's against this
bill I mean you are former general
counsel of the agency and currently in
private practice here in Washington who
you you're not speaking alone on this I
would take it well I don't feel that I'm
in a very large crowd in part because
this legislation has received very
little attention and I think that that's
quite deplorable if not downright
shocking it's a very important piece of
legislation albeit in an area that's
largely outside the the public view and
I think what's happening is that the the
those in the Congress who are seeking to
symbolically aggrandize their their
claims to in effect be co-managers of
the intelligence operations of the
United States are exploiting an
opportunity created by indignation
resulting from the iran-contra affair to
push forward a piece of legislation
which is not being I believe as
carefully considered as it should be
which is certainly not being
reported on in the press and my guess
would be that most people have no idea
of anything about this legislation or if
they do they think that it's a minor
adjustment to the procedures for
notifying the Congress of special
activities my belief is that at least on
the the 48-hour prior notice point that
the administration is opposing the bill
there are there any non congressional or
non administrative types out there other
than yourself that you know what well
against the bill there are some other
individuals former government officials
involved with for example the American
Bar Association's Standing Committee on
law and national security a group of us
wrote a report to that committee which
is entirely personal but certainly
represented considerable reservations
about the bill on the part of a number
of former government officials there are
some organizations such as the
Association of former intelligence
officers which I believe have submitted
criticisms of the legislation to the
committee's as a practical matter why I
oppose the bill at all do you believe
that this notice requirement is somehow
going to interfere with legitimate
covert activities I think that in
probably the vast majority of cases it
will not interfere on the other hand I
believe that there there have been cases
in the past in which notification of
before the commencement and indeed
before the completion of the activity
would have enhanced the risks to such a
degree that the one would have hesitated
to engage in them at all what is the
risk the risk is simply a risk of
disclosure and and that's that is not
intended to impugn
the integrity or reliability of anyone
in the Congress or on the staffs of
these committees but it's essentially an
axiom of security practice that if you
tell a secret to a hundred people it's
substantially less safe than if you tell
it to to two people even if every
individually every one of those hundred
people is believed to be reliable in
this case you're dealing with sizeable
committees with sizable staffs with a
machinery in the executive branch in
order to make these notifications which
again expands the of the group of those
who are in the know and and there is a
security problem I think that because
let me try and phrase this in steps I
mean the first step is that the the
Congress cannot take away the
president's inherent constitutional
authority and if the president has such
an authority to carry on a covert action
or intelligence collection activity
without notifying the Congress this bill
will not change it although it will
certainly reduce it to as the Supreme
Court has said and to its lowest ebb
however as a matter of politics I think
any president who would act in the
future in contravention of this bill
would risk having himself when the facts
became known considered by the vast
majority of the American people as a law
breaker and I think most people have
difficulty conceiving of the fact that
the president may have a duty
constitutionally to not to abide by an
unconstitutional law in these
circumstances he has no way of testing
it in the court and therefore he has no
choice but to proceed in defiance
of the law I think that would be a very
hard position for president to bring
himself to in the future and very hard
to defend afterwards so that this law is
in effect either going to encourage
inaction in this very small number of
sensitive cases to which I refer or it
will incite confrontations
constitutional crises of the kind that
we've just gone through in a sense with
Iran and the Contras and I don't think
those are good for the for the country
as you know this discussion we're having
now as part of c-span's process and
policy programming which is in this case
a continuing look at the covert
operations law and with that process and
that policy in mind what's your view
about whether or not or what would how
would of the iran-contra situation have
played out had this law been in effect
and had the president complied with it
well in that particular case I daresay
that if the law had been in effect and
the President had complied with it never
would have happened isn't that the point
of those who argue on behalf of the new
law I'm sure it is and in your response
to that my response to that is that I I
deplore as much as anyone else I believe
what the President did in the
iran-contra affair I personally believe
that a a president who was doing his job
properly would consult whether there
were a law on the books or not with the
Congress just as a matter of
self-preservation I think it's it's very
ill-advised for a president to launch a
clandestine activity which anyone can
say has enormous potential for blowing
up in his face without at least trying
to co-opt if I can put it that way some
of the congressional leadership so that
he's not all alone when when the flat
begins so there was a in that case I
think a bad policy bad judgment all
sorts of bad things but that doesn't
mean that we should pass a bad law to
respond to it bad or not getting back to
the process part of it technically what
would the president have been required
to do he made an oral agreement to ship
arms would the law have required him to
write it down would it have required him
to make a phone call
submit a letter what would have been
well it would have required him first of
all to write it down either to sign a
written finding or to to sign such a
finding I believe the law provides
within 48 hours after making it orally
in exceptional circumstances and again
let me stress I think that that's a very
desirable thing a very desirable
procedure but I have serious doubts as
to whether it is constitutionally
permissible for the Congress to tell the
president how he should make decisions
then the president would have had to
give prior notice
either to the committees or there's a
kind of descending hierarchy or
ascending hierarchy of restricted
disclosure and probably in this case he
would have felt it was appropriate to
use the most restrictive approach which
is to inform the the leadership of the
two houses and to show them a copy of
the finding but not to leave them a copy
of the finding and then every week
thereafter to report to them on whether
it was still going on whether the
circumstances had changed in the
remaining minute so let's speak to the
issue of the definition of covert
activities the bill attempts to do that
in fact it does do you think it's
possible to define in order to solve the
covert activities to the point where
it's effective well the the definition
which is in the bill is essentially a
definition that has been in the
president's executive orders on
intelligence for many years now from
through several administrations and
given the nature of these activities
finding a perfect definition is almost
impossible
I think this definition is about as good
as one can get and has the virtue of
thing generally understood in the
intelligence community you don't have
that that is not an issue as far as
you're concerned well there's one issue
in the definition which is that the
draftsman of the bill in addition to
adopting a perfectly I think reasonably
good definition let's say if special
Activities has chosen to continue to
impose on the CIA the obligation to
report every activity abroad which is
not conducted for the sole purpose of
intelligence collection a formula that
goes back to the Hughes Ryan amendment
many years ago I think there's no need
or place for that in any amended
legislation last word whether or not
it's a good bill or a bad bill are you
willing to make a prediction as to
whether it will become law well I think
the the odds at the moment are very
strong
in the Senate I suspect they're probably
strong in the house
the real question in my mind is if the
president vetoes the the bill which I
hope he would and expect he would
whether the Congress has the votes in
the will to to override Dan silver
former general counsel of the CIA thanks
for helping us on process and policy as
we wrap up our discussion of the covert
action bill thank you pleasure next on
c-span we re air our process and policy
called in which this week looks at the
b-1 bomber as an example of how the
defense contracting process works
our guest is Nick Cod's author of the
book wild blue yonder money from a fix
and the b-1 bomber
neck cuts author of the newly published
book wild blue yonder subtitled money
politics and the b-1 bomber tell us
first if you will why you wrote this
book I wrote the book Bob because first
of all I wanted to find out how we make
defense decisions and if I succeeded in
finding out I wanted to try to explain
to citizens how we make those decisions
out of the the book came out of concern
that defense is a subject that is
seemingly so complex so difficult to
understand that we as citizens don't
participate in the process very much I
tried to in wild blue yonder I try to by
following one story to show how the
defense decision-making process works
particularly the politics of it before
we get more deeply into the question of
money in politics now can you bring us
up to date on the b-1 bomber which as
you know it in your book has been called
both the best warplane in the world and
the flying Edsel
well the Air Force has been trying to
get a new bomber for thirty years they
finally got it in the last month the
last of 100 bombers have been delivered
to the Air Force at a cost of about
twenty eight billion dollars or two
hundred and eighty million dollars
applying the b1 is a strategic bomber
its mission is to be a deterrent against
war if war came to be able to fly to the
deepest heart of the Soviet Union we
have a hundred of them and they're at
four bases you have written a very
critical book critical both of the b-1
bomber and of what President Eisenhower
called the military-industrial
establishment and the whole defense
procurement process how much cooperation
that you get from the Defense Department
in writing this book I got a lot of
cooperation from
people from really all walks of life
generals from the Air Force so-called
captains of industry Rockwell
International was the principal
manufacturer labor unions that were
involved in it members of Congress one
of the one of the great things about I
think about our democracy and about our
Free Press is that it is relatively easy
to get information from people we will
be going to the telephones in just a few
minutes please call us if you have a
question or comment the telephone
numbers if I can find them in a eastern
and central time zones area two oh two
six two eight two five two five and the
mountain and Pacific time zones two oh
two seven eight three two seven two
seven
let me quote a sentence from your book
and get your reaction to it or gets you
to tell us what you meant the nation has
built dozens of expensive weapons
systems in a disorderly and wasteful
process buffeted by erratic political
and economic currents what does that
mean what that means is every time we
make a decision whether it's to build a
new bomber or an aircraft carrier or a
helicopter that all the pressures of
politics in American society come to
bear on that decision and the effect of
many special interests competing in the
marketplace in terms of defense I think
has not produced ideal results it's
resulted in weapons we don't need it's
resulted in delays and it's resulted in
spending too much money on systems and
not getting the best systems the problem
is I think all of us Bob start out from
believing that we that we want what's
best for the country we want to defend
the country but all of us also have
special interests I come from San
Antonio Texas
we have many Air Force bases in San
Antonio
those bases are our special interest
nobody wants to close their base people
who live in Palmdale California and have
plants that employ twenty or thirty
thousand people building a certain
airplane have a special interest in the
building of that airplane what I'm
talking about is when all of our special
interests come to play on making a
military decision the decisions don't
necessarily turn out to be the ones that
will best serve military need and
national interests each of the services
they want to do best for what's best for
the country but each of the services
have their own special needs and they
pursue those needs vigorously in the
case of the Air Force the bomber stands
at the heart of the Air Force is very
reason for independence in being you
make a reference or two in your book to
SDI Star Wars the Strategic Defense
Initiative that may stand is the biggest
decision in the fence or counter defense
weaponry made by the Reagan
administration with the approval of
Congress do you have the same concerns
about SDI that are reflected in your
book I think that from what I have seen
so far what I've learned so far about
SDI as I was working on a wild blue
yonder is that there are more political
self-interested politics and economic
need driving that program and and there
will be even more in the future than any
other defense program we've had my point
of view would be that if SDI makes sense
to make our country safer at a cost that
we can afford that is a military
decision a national defense decision it
should be made on those grounds it
shouldn't be made on the grounds that
there are 200,000 jobs involved in it in
various areas of the American economy
need it we can we can do different and
better things with our economic
resources our guest tonight is Nick
Cutts author of the new book
blue yonder money politics and the b-1
bomber he's a freelance writer also a
distinguished adjunct professor at
American University I'm a professor of
journalism I believe is that that's
correct and you work for the Washington
Post for three years in the 1970s before
that worked in Washington for the Des
Moines Register where you won a Pulitzer
Prize you also won the 1985 National
Magazine Award for a story on American
military leadership I think that's an
unusual coupling very few writers of any
others have won both the Pulitzer and
the yeah and the emotional magazine
award that tell us if you will what did
you win your Pulitzer for my appealed
surprise was for an investigation of
unsanitary conditions in federally
inspected meatpacking plants and some
attempted cover-up of those conditions
by the federal government and how did
you move from that specialty to your
current expertise on military spending
well I I got interested in learning
about defense issues in a specialized
way about four or five years ago Bob by
doing a study on military leadership and
I started it at American University with
a group of graduate students and the
military leadership piece led to this
book in a very specific way we'll take
our first telephone call from Ulysses
Kansas go ahead please well I'll come to
Wichita but I I contend in the book that
two of the four bases at which the b1 is
located were picked for political
reasons rather than out than than pure
military strategic reasons McConnell and
Wichita
because senator dole of Kansas insisted
upon it and the citizens of Wichita were
worried McConnell was going to close
down they put pressure on their senator
Dyess in Abilene Texas because the Air
Force wanted to please senator then
senator Tower chairman of the Armed
Services Committee military officers Air
Force officers have told me that neither
McConnell in our diets were ideal sights
from a military standpoint to base these
bombers in the case of McConnell if you
want the details McConnell is located in
the midst of a crowded urban area it
shares runways with a Boeing aircraft
company plant the Air Force has very
specific criteria or the basing of the
ideal basing of strategic weapons with
nuclear warheads and McConnell doesn't
meet them it was also economically less
effective than other places because they
did not have storage facilities for
nuclear weapons
I found your discussion of how the b1
base happened to be located at McConnell
especially interesting because it
involved three different rather
prominent figures in Congress you
mentioned that Bob Dole was for to be
one you had the other Kansas senator in
the Nancy Kassebaum who I believe is
against the b-1 bomber and Dan Glickman
the Wichita area congressman opposed to
it can you sort of relate them through
the whole story well as I get the story
I think reliably from Air Force officers
who participated in the decision first
of all Wichita was not being considered
more ideal sites would have been fairly
isolated areas in in the Dakotas in
Montana or elsewhere when when senator
Dole started putting the heat on the
Pentagon saying we want this base at
McConnell
there was resistance in the airforce
both because some people didn't like the
site and also because Air Force officers
did not want to reward senator Kassebaum
senator Kassebaum had not only been an
outspoken opponent of the b1 she was the
chair of the Senate military reform
caucus which was giving the Pentagon a
hard time about a lot of different
things Hotel California go ahead please
hello hi I guess I'll turn this
television down wait a minute I'm at
quartz Hill California that's about
three or four miles from Palmdale where
they build the p1 bomber and what I see
is for the last 15 or 20 years all they
have up here is glorified welfare I call
the b-1 bomber because all they do is
wait from one contract to the other to
keep up the employment up here in this
Antelope Valley and this year b-1 bomber
really put a boom on around here boy it
really made things but they're
indiscriminately building and building
everything's instead of trying to get
some permanent industria instead of that
pseudo b-1 bomber and I was scared to
death that thing while they were testing
it they were tested over my house in
this residential section and we know
that two of them have already crashed do
you believe that a pelican brought that
last b-1 bomber down I the Air Force's
official explanation which was that a
pelican which probably weighs somewhere
between 25 and 40 pounds hit the bomber
at a particularly sensitive Speight
place on the skin of the bomber and it
punctured some very vital electronic
control gear it's it's not heartening to
to know that 280 million dollar plane
can be brought down by a pelican
particularly when that plane has
to fly at low altitude where many birds
are but I hope that that was a freak
accident and that kind of thing will not
happen again how about the boom in
employment that the caller mentioned I
think you have some figures in your book
as to just how many jobs were created
interviewing indeed in the Palmdale area
with Rockwell there were probably 25 or
30,000 jobs involved at the peak of the
program nationally 50 or 60,000 jobs but
the story of Southern California and
this bomber is a story that repeats
itself endlessly
we in the 1960 presidential election
that's 20 that seven presidential
elections ago President Eisenhower who
did not like the predecessor of this
plane which was called the b70 did not
want to build it at the last moment in
the 1960 campaign he turned that program
back on to try to help Nixon win the
1960 election we see this and we're in
another presidential election it's going
to be interesting to see what happens in
1971 there were a lot of doubts about
the the b1 as it was in its research and
development stage there was a lot of
pressure on President Nixon to stop it
Rhee study it and all of a sudden
President Nixon had another agenda
getting reelected and one of the
president's re-election programs a
secret one was called keep California
green keep California green according to
the memoranda which the archives has was
a program to create a hundred thousand
new aerospace jobs in California between
March of 1971 and the election in 72 and
they did it the fact of the matter is
every presidential election year we have
the man who sits in the White House
trying to use defense toward political
ends
it may be a very natural phenomenon but
I don't think it's a good one
Burbank Illinois please join us
great that you are on there with the b-1
bomber one of my favorites with the
bradley and that makes missile and all
that other trash stuff with the pentagon
bite i was wondering if the d one
carries nuclear devices we're supposed
to I know I know it's supposed to go in
under enemy radar that was you know it's
originally sold as a an airplane that
could fly under the Soviet radar and not
be detectable and it could fly up
farther and faster and carry more you
know throw weight nuclear weapons or any
other airplane in history and all that
trash how much of that can it actually
do or is it just like the Bradley and
like the D VAD and like the other
garbage you know the one tank and all
the other garbage that we've been sold
you know Carter cut the b-1 bomber from
the military budget and reagan and
reinstated it so you know I mean okay I
think we have your question there as you
answer that question mister qotsa would
you relate the b-1 bomber to the stealth
bomber yes I will first of all I'm not
as harsh as your caller as I die we need
weapons to defend ourselves and I don't
think that they're garbage in their
trash and I don't say in this book that
that the b-1 bomber will not contribute
to national defense I say it's not as
good as it should be now your caller
asks what what kind of weapons does this
bomber carry what can it do the bomber
is equipped to carry 60 tons of either
nuclear bombs or nuclear missiles one
b-1 bomber is equipped with the weaponry
to query to cause 200 times the damage
of the bomb that destroyed
Shaima so it is it is a very very
awesome powerful weapon Huntington Beach
California go ahead please I want to
talk about Star Wars because I believe
it's a blatant example of wasteful
defense spending and I live in Southern
California and which tends to benefit
most from these vast military
expenditures however the the Star Wars
scenario is not accepted by the vast
majority the scientific community Hans
Bader just spoke at a local college
saying that it's a pipe dream it can't
work it's a huge waste of money now I
even though I live in this area that
would benefit from it I can see the long
term that the nation would suffer by
this movement of as much as possibly a
trillion dollars to a weapon system they
can't work we could employ many many
teachers health workers so on and so
forth with the same amount of money now
on the positive side what I propose is
that every weapon system that we come up
with be preceded by a proposal to the
Soviet Union to either stop production
or eliminate something that's already in
production of one of their weapon
systems rather than going ahead with
these unrealistic dream okay thank you
for your comment let's give mr. Kotter
chance to respond to that well I I think
that the the biggest sort of generality
about defensive weapons against nuclear
attacks such as star wars we went
through a very similar debate 20 years
ago with the ABM the anti-ballistic
missile system eventually we came to a
treaty in 1972 with the Soviets in which
both sides said that they would not
deploy these systems aside from the
enormous costs many scientists say that
that we will never be able to develop a
system that would be effective enough to
protect even our military installations
much less our cities in our popular
could I ask you at that point have you
been surprised
despite the point you were making by the
amount of support for Star Wars in
Congress and these times for budget
money is rather tight and that Congress
is not giving the president everything
he asked for Star Wars and yet they
continue to give him a very substantial
support for Star Wars well Bob I think
there's a mixture of motives and we get
confused with them the mixture of
motives is this number one the American
people and the the members of Congress
who represent them do believe in a
strong national defense the vast
majority of people in this country want
us to have a strong defense so if there
is a possibility of developing a weapon
that would defend us against nuclear
attack people want to explore it but why
is there all that support to push ahead
to push ahead at the rate of three four
or five billion dollars a year or more
part of it is because of political
economic interest the contracts or star
wars development are spread over the
entire United States not only to
different manufacturers but to major
research universities and there are a
lot of people who are interested in
pushing that program both because they
believe in a strong national defense and
because they have something at stake in
it and it may be human nature but we
tend to identify our own interests with
the common good Pinehurst North Carolina
go ahead please the speakers just said I
have to identify my own interest in this
I have a brother that is a retired
lieutenant colonel in the Air Force and
spent all of that time flying b-52s I've
heard not infinitum about the
deficiencies and obsolescence of that
aircraft and have another brother who
spent close to 20 years with Rockwell
International which builds a b-1 and
I've heard the same sort of stories
about the difficulties of building a
state-of-the-art aircraft so after
stating my my prejudices or preconceived
notions I'd like to have
- question 1 is there another aircraft
in the history of aviation that can even
be compared with the b1 and if in fact
there is not our Specter is not isn't it
very difficult or isn't it intellectual
sophistry - ii guess what is the best
technology and the best management in
the country or in the world for that
matter giving it their best shot to
build something that's never been never
been built before that is to say are we
letting the the best be the enemy of the
good
are those your two questions yeah I
think you're making some good points
number one the b-52s are old the
youngest of the b-52s are were built in
1962 they're 25 years old if you believe
in strategic bombers we do need a new
strategic bomber and we've got one the
b1 I do not argue and wild blue yonder
that we should not have a new strategic
bomber ever since
ICBMs came on the scene intercontinental
ballistic missiles there has been an
argument about just how important it is
to have a bomber that will get to a
target eight hours after a war starts I
come down on the side of people that say
that there still is a need for a bomber
both as part of the strategic deterrent
and for use in a possible conventional
war so on that point I agree there
should be a new bomber what I argue in
the book is that the political process
that we went through to come up with a
new bomber was horribly wasteful was
erratic that the b1 was pushed pulled
and tugged in different directions it
was stopped and started and stopped and
started again depending upon the
prevailing political winds and that is
not an effective way to do national
defense your second question
is and your comments are also pertinent
and there's a lot to them in the 1980s
in the aerospace age in the nuclear age
we are building very very sophisticated
technologically difficult systems and
the best can be the enemy of the good in
the case of the b1 I'm afraid that was
the case when we started out in the late
60s and early 70s the air force the
people who wanted to push the state of
the art of technology to its to its
limits we're trying to do too much with
a with a very very difficult assignment
they were trying to have a plane that
flew two-and-a-half times the speed of
sound high one and a half times the
speed at the sound speed of sound on the
ground they had a very complex escape
capsule on the plane that they couldn't
make work so the the ideal was being was
getting in the way of achieving a
practical plane but if you do believe in
bombers and I think we needed a new
bomber we should have gone about it more
effectively
we now have one the b1 and we are eight
years and it's top secret so we don't
know but we are eight years and
something like eight to fourteen billion
dollars into developing another bomber
called the b2 or the stealth and it
still not had had its first experimental
flight I'll just add the question that
the most critics of the man bomber would
throw in at this point I think you can
give me a quick answer to it why do we
need a strategic bomber when we have
such a large force of ICBMs and
submarine-launched nuclear missiles
which make up the third leg of the triad
Bob there are a number of arguments for
the strategic bomber the triad
is supposedly builds in elements of
safety to the deterrent the enemy our
adversary the Soviet Union might be able
to knock out our ICBMs and their silos
on the land before we made a decision to
fire them but if they do that the idea
of the other two parts of the deterrent
the submarines and the bombers is they
will be deterred from doing that because
they will know that we have other
weapons we can use some people say
submarines are enough right now the
submarine is is a quite invulnerable
weapon it may not always be another
reason for the people who argue for
bombers is that the bomber is a weapon
that provides flexibility that you don't
have to push a button you don't have to
make a decision and push a button that
has an irrevocable commitment to a
nuclear holocaust
with bombers the argument has been back
thirty years when it started bombers
versus I ICBMs general LeMay was a great
warrior leader of World War two he said
with bombers you can get them in the air
you can maneuver them you can threaten
with them you can project force but you
don't have to make the decision that
they're on their way they provide
flexibility to you those are a couple of
the arguments why bombers or strategic
bombers are still valid Palm Desert
California you are on c-span I guess the
question I have in mind is why is it
that the Russians have approximately
10,000 scientists are great scientists
including laser technology working on
Star Wars themselves and have them for
some time
I suggest that they would like to have
us back off over a period of time with
this new treaty so that they can upgrade
theirs to the point where it'll be too
late for us to upgrade and implement our
system thank you
well you're you're you're tell--you're
you're talking about an area of
knowledge in which I am NOT an expert
I read information that argues the point
that you do I also hear constantly hear
testimony from read articles from
scientists who say that neither side is
going to be able to perfect a defensive
so-called Star Wars system that will be
effective and and at this point I think
that what's needed is is healthy
skepticism I'm certainly not against
research into laser weapons research and
defensive weapons the question is how
fast and how far do we go Canton Ohio go
ahead please yes I just wanted to wanted
to ask why the government doesn't give
our scientists and our researchers
enough time to finish a project once
they started I don't think you put a
time time limit on technology it seems
like we go to stat something and we work
on it for a short period of time and all
of a sudden they pull the rug out from
under everybody and they stop the funds
and we have a potentially good project
and they just got they just got half
they did demolish before they have a
chance to either work
well I you're pointing to one of the
difficulties in the process as an
earlier caller suggested it takes a long
period of time to develop a complex new
weapon in the space age Congress makes
annual appropriations in which they
determine how much money we're going to
spend on various projects Congress tends
to change its mind presidents tend to
change their minds sometimes for good
reasons sometimes for not-so-good
reasons and one of the suggestions for
reform of the process is that we make
longer-term commitments to develop
weapons so we don't have this stop-go
process which
is inefficient Vancouver Washington
please join us yes I die - mr. Carson
b-52 was of course quite useful in the
Vietnam War
what kind of conventional capability
with the Beast is to be one-half would
that be useful in a sort of war the the
the b1 originally the Air Force was not
thinking about can the using that the b1
conventionally in fact it did not the b1
was not originally conceived of carrying
bomb racks for conventional weapons
under the pressure from some members of
Congress led by Senator Glenn and really
under the political pressure of being
able to justify this weapon the b1 now
is being equipped so that it can it can
play a role in conventional war as well
as part of the nuclear deterrent I think
that the justification for a strategic
bomber should include the ability to
project force in a conventional war the
most common way that it would be used
that you hear spoken about is that in a
in a large-scale conventional war in
Europe that the use of a bomber that
could quickly get to the battlefield to
attack a large advancing force would
would would would serve a useful purpose
so the short answer is yes the b1 is
able to perform a conventional role we
went through a period beginning in the
late Eisenhower years where a force of
b-52 bombers was kept in the air
continuously so they would be able to
respond even faster than if they had to
take off from an airfield somewhere to a
nuclear threat from the Soviet Union can
you conceive of the of the b1 ever be
you ever being used in that way it exact
exactly what way both in the where Isner
are kept a force of b-52s flying
continued
twenty-four hours a day eisenhower did
and then Kennedy did I think in the in
the early 60s well that that is one of
the advantages of of having that weapon
we have tankers and you put the bombers
in the air and you put the tankers in
the air and you can keep the Bombers in
a highly ready state without committing
them bomber advocates would say that
that is that shows the flexibility and
usefulness of bombers grafton Virginia
go ahead please number one try to hold
it the two of you well we've got a lot
of calls waiting date quick bb's can
bring down ballistic missiles most
certainly pelicans at 600 miles an hour
can if you care about pilots you replace
the b-52 if you watch the papers several
years ago they were refueling one in
California in the wing buckled tail came
off when I was in sac in New Hampshire
in 1958 because of turbulence from
low-level if you care about ground
troops Gerald Palmer who wrote a book
about the war said that the b-52 was the
most feared weapon according to
intelligence reports that had supported
as far as the enemy was concerned so if
you care about pilots you get a new
plane if you care about the ground guy
you won't give them a bomber and then my
question is sir I just flipped open your
book wild blue yonder and I just I
haven't read it all but I noticed you
said gold-plated bomber now do you think
this is gold-plated at 280 million you
ought to write a book and you agree or
not on the c-17 which is probably at
pushing 200 million a far worse decision
as opposed to other alternatives tell us
about the c-17 well this the c-17 we
haven't built yet but your caller is
very knowledgeable maybe more
knowledgeable than I am about weapons of
the seat the c-17 is is a new transport
plane McDonnell Douglas is just starting
to build it it has been in research and
development for many years going at
least seven at least seven or eight
years and I'm not quite sure
of the the point your caller is trying
to make but all weapons are vulnerable
that's that's what it's horrible but
that's what war is all about offense
versus defense and both sides are trying
to develop an offense that that can
overcome the other side's defense and
vice versa yes the b1 is vulnerable
not only to Birds the b1 is vulnerable
to missiles we've just seen in
Afghanistan very untrained people the
ethic the the guerrillas in Afghanistan
with Stinger missiles handheld Stinger
missiles bringing down very
sophisticated Soviet planes so airplanes
are vulnerable to attack
the idea of the B one was through
technology by flying low hugging the
ground going under radar was to try to
overcome the advantages of the defense
you mentioned earlier that the total
cost of the 100 B ones will be 28
billion dollars that's 280 million
dollars per plane averages out to do
that can you tell us in a few words how
the Pentagon arrives at a price of that
magnitude well it starts out by sheer
guesswork because actually it's more
than 28 billion if you add in all the
research dollars on the b1 it's probably
40 billion and the failed plane before
that it's 50 billion but it starts out
Bob with a guesstimate because when you
enter the research and development stage
no one really knows what it's going to
cost because you're in or you're trying
to produce new technology when it
finally got down to it with the b1 the
how many planes we built and what we
were going to spend for them was a
combination of politics economics and
military need all mixed together
secretary Weinberger decided that
Congress's choke point on the b-1 bomber
was
20 billion dollars in nineteen eighty
one dollars and he said how many bombers
can you give us for twenty billion the
air force in Rockwell said a hundred B
ones and when you add in the inflation
factor we got up to twenty eight billion
San Diego California go ahead please
Thank You ma I have 26 years experience
in the aerospace industry with General
Dynamics Corporation my career with him
started very early on in the 50s and I
was involved in the development of the
Atlas intercom of ballistic missiles and
other weapon systems
I'm address I'm making this thank me
because I'm addressing myself to the
statements preview I'll be made by
others with regard to Star Wars arrest
the eye at the time of the early
development of ICBMs the scientific
community in this country said that
hitting targets as small as a hundred
yards to a quarter of a mile in size at
distances of 5,000 nautical miles was
impossible today is we can hit targets
as small as 36 inches at those distances
what I'm trying to say to you is that to
say that the SDI system will not work
because the present state of the art
dictates that it won't work
it's tomfoolery okay thank you very much
for your comment we're going to try to
squeeze in a couple more calls or at
least one and it may be too late already
so I'll ask you to respond to that call
well you know I think we've talked about
that there there's a lot of argument
about what you can do with Strategic
Defense Initiative z' with lasers and
and other new technology and I don't
think we know the answers to it I you
know I'd make the point I made before if
we if if we do it if we spend a lot of
money on it it should be for military
need not because it's going to support
our political economy Riverside
California we will make this the last
call go ahead please please thank you
this is a really complex as you I
understand and they missed the
front end of the discussion is there
some kind of proposal that mr. Kutz has
he has written a book called wild blue
yonder with the subtitle money politics
in the b-1 bomber whether we can see
that title one last time before we go
off the air and it is a book in which he
both relates the full story of the b-1
bomber but also relates that to the
whole defense procurement processes that
a synopsis yes what would i recommend i
would recommend that we that we have a
lot more that that everyone from the
President on down to us as citizens need
to be more knowledgeable the president
needs independent advice to make sure
that when we make military decisions
about building weapons that we make
those decisions based on national
defense interests not on self-serving
parochial interests and how do we do
that it isn't some abstract
military-industrial complex it is all of
us who are involved and what is required
of our society what is required is more
discipline in our society and a
willingness to sacrifice our own
interest at times for a broader national
interest the issue in defense really
isn't much different than the interest
in the deficit are we willing to raise
taxes if that's what's called for at
some point are we willing to consume
less and save more the same issues
applied to defense are we willing to do
are we willing to sacrifice a base in
our hometown if it's not needed and
there are dozens of bases around this
country that aren't needed and spend
that more money that money more
effectively thank you very much for
being with us our guest tonight has been
nick cuts the author of the newly
published book while blue yonder
subtitled money politics and the b-1
bomber we appreciate very much for being
with us tonight thanks to our c-span
viewers for your questions and comments
and have a pleasant evening
[Music]
if you have further questions or
comments for our guest Nick cots you can
write him in care of Pantheon books
the address is 201 East 50th Street New
York New York one zero zero two two
[Music]
you're watching c-span America's Network
c-span is a non-profit cooperative
created and supported by the cable
television industry